Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
Also, remember to download this practice lab
from the link in the description and try it
out yourself in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these, I highly
recommend picking up Boson’s NetSim for
the CCNA, click the link in the video description
to check it out.
It’s a network simulator like packet tracer,
but it’s even better, and it includes all
of these guided labs to not only help you
get hands-on practice configuring and troubleshooting,
but also deepen your understanding of the
exam topics.
I used it myself when studying for my certifications,
so I feel confident about recommending it
to all of you.
Watch until the end of this video, we’ll
take a quick look at a lab from NetSim.
If you want to get your own copy of NetSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
In this lab we’ll analyze rapid spanning
tree protocol, with a little bit of configuration
at the end.
I hope this lab will help you test and improve
your understanding of the concepts of RSTP,
such as the different port roles and link
types.
Let’s get right into it with step 1.
First we are asked which switch is the root
bridge.
Each switch has a priority of 32769, which
is 32768 plus 1, so these numbers are all
for VLAN1, we will only be dealing with one
VLAN in this lab.
Of course, if there are multiple VLANs, the
RSTP topology would probably be different
in each VLAN, because can we choose a different
root bridge etc for each VLAN.
So, because each switch has the same priority,
we have to compare MAC addresses.
SW1’s MAC address is the lowest.
Both SW1’s and SW3’s MAC addresses start
with 000, but the next digit in SW1’s is
5, and in SW3’s it’s C, which is equivalent
to 12.
So, SW1’s is the lowest, and it’s the
root bridge.
Now let’s examine the port role and state
of each interface on SW1 and see what’s
different than what we have learned so far
about the root bridge.
Enter privileged exec mode with ENABLE.
Next, SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
Okay, F0/2, F0/1, and F0/24 are designated
ports in a forwarding state, and F0/3 is a
backup port in a discarding state, although
its written as blocking in the output of this
command.
I’m going to take these labels I have made
and place them over the interfaces.
So, what is different than what we have learned
about the root bridge in the course?
Well, I have repeated multiple times that
all interfaces on the root bridge are designated
ports, however in this case F0/3 is a backup port.
So actually, the more accurate statement is
that the root bridge has a designated port
in each collision domain it is connected to.
In modern networks, hubs aren’t really used,
so we usually just say that all interfaces
are designated.
However if the root bridge has two interfaces
in the same collision domain because they
both connect to the same hub, the rule that
there must be only one designated port per
collision domain applies, and the other interface
will be a backup port.
If this was classic spanning tree, F0/3 would
be a non-designated port.
So, that’s step 1, although I have said
many times that every interface on the root
bridge is designated, in this case F0/3 isn’t
because its in the same collision domain as
F0/2.
Step 2 asks us to determine the port role
and state of each remaining switch interface,
without using the CLI.
First let’s place the root ports.
SW2’s root port is F0/1, with a root cost
of 19.
How about SW3’s root port?
Does this hub add any spanning tree cost to
the BPDU?
No, it doesn’t, so SW3’s F0/2 also has
a cost of 19, making it the root port of SW3.
SW4’s interfaces have the same root cost,
so which neighbor has the lowest bridge ID?
It’s SW3, because its MAC address is lower,
so SW4’s F0/1 interface is its root port.
Next up, the designated ports.
SW3’s F0/1, across from SW4’s root port,
is designated of course.
Now, for the gigabitethernet link between
SW2 and SW3, which side will be designated?
They both have the same root cost, 19, but
SW3 has the lower bridge ID, so its G0/1
will be the designated port.
How about between SW2 and SW4?
In this case, SW2 has the lower root cost,
so its F0 /2 will be designated.
So, SW2’s G0/1 and SW4’s F0/2 will be
alternate ports, in a discarding state.
These ports connected to the end hosts should
all be designated ports by the way, I won’t
bother labeling them.
Now let’s quickly confirm on each switch.
We already saw SW1, so I’ll go on SW2.
ENABLE.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
F0/1 is the root, F0/2 is designated, G0/1
is alternate, and F0/23 and 24 are designated.
Looks good.
Next I’ll check on SW3.
ENABLE.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
F0/2 is the root port, G0/1 is designated,
and so is F0/1.
F0/24, connected to the PC, is also designated.
Just as we expected.
Finally, I’ll go on SW4.
ENABLE.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
F0/1 is the root port, F0/2 is alternate,
and F0/24 is designated.
Okay, looks like we got it all correct.
Finally, let’s manually configure the appropriate
RSTP link type on each interface.
The one I really want to show is SW1’s F0/24,
so let’s quickly go through the others,
starting here on SW4 first.
CONF T. Let’s configure F0/1 and 2 as point-to-point
links, because they are directly connected
to switches, they are operating in full duplex
mode.
INTERFACE RANGE F0/1 to 2.
SPANNING-TREE LINK-TYPE POINT-TO-POINT.
Next, I’ll configure F0/24 as an edge port
by enabling portfast.
INTERFACE F0/24.
SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST.
Now let’s check.
DO SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
Okay, F0/1 and 2 are point to point, which
is correct.
Actually, they were already point to point
by default, I just wanted to practice the
manual configuration.
Now, what’s up with F0/24?
It still has the default type of point to
point.
Well, this is something I didn’t explain
in the lecture.
Edge ports connected to an end host like this
will still be point to point links if they
are using full duplex.
There is no hub here, therefore the link is
full duplex, so this is a point to point link.
However, its also an edge port.
It doesn’t work in packet tracer, but if
you enter the SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST command
on a port on a real switch, it will display
both edge AND point to point here in the type
section.
Point to point means it is full duplex, edge
means portfast is enabled.
So, it’s both an edge port and a point to
point port.
Okay, let’s do SW3 next.
F0/1, and G0/1 should be point to point, however
F0/2 is connected to a hub, it should be a
shared port.
Actually, let’s check before we configure
it.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
As you can see, the switch automatically sets
it to the correct port type.
So really, the only one we HAVE to configure
is F0/24, because portfast won’t be enabled
by default.
For the sake of time, let’s just do that.
CONF T. INTERFACE F0/24.
SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST.
Okay, next let’s go on SW2.
Let’s check first again, all ports are using
full duplex, so they should all be point to
point by default.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
Indeed, all ports are point to point.
Again, for time, I’ll just enable portfast
on F0/23 and 24.
CONF T. INTERFACE RANGE F0/23 to 24.
SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST.
Okay, finally SW1.
In this case, it has three ports connected
to a hub.
These should all be shared by default.
Only F0/1 should be point to point.
Let’s check.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
As expected, F0/2, 3, and 24 are shared.
So, F0/24 is connected to a hub, but there
are end hosts connected to the hub.
Should this be an edge port?
The answer is yes, the hub basically doesn’t
exist in terms of spanning tree, it’s different
than if it were connected to a switch here.
So, F0/24 is an edge port, AND a shared port,
just like I explained with the edge point
to point links connected to end hosts on the
other switches.
Let’s configure it.
CONF T. INTERFACE F0/24.
SPANNING-TREE PORFAST.
And let’s check.
DO SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
Okay, so just like before, in packet tracer
it doesn’t display here, but on a real switch
it will display both edge and shared here
in the type column for F0/24.
Point to point and shared distinguish between
full and half duplex, but either can be an
edge port as well.
Okay, that’s all for this lab, I hoped this
helped you get familiar with some concepts
of RSTP.
Next, let’s take a look at a lab in Boson
NetSim.
Okay, for today's Boson NetSim lab preview
we're once again doing a lab from NetSim for
CCNP ENCOR.
I said this before, but that's because spanning
tree configuration isn't actually in the CCNA
exam topics list so Boson doesn't include
it in NetSim for CCNA.
But I just want to show you one of the spanning
tree labs they have from NetSim for ENCOR.
So we'll do spanning tree 1.
I've already loaded the lab so click on 'lab
instructions'.
Here is the topology.
So, there is one router and three switches
and two PCs.
Here's a list of the commands you need to
know to complete the lab.
IP addresses on the device, and the lab tasks
themselves.
So, this lab demonstrates something I really
like about Boson NetSim.
Although this is a lab focused on spanning
tree, the title is spanning tree 1, you don't
only configure spanning tree.
Task 1 is configure VLANs, so you'll be configuring
trunk ports, creating VLANs, adding interfaces
to VLANs as access ports.
Task 2 is configure the router, so configure
the interface with dot1q encapsulation for
VLAN 3, verify connectivity, and then finally
task 3 is 'observe spanning tree'.
So I think this is great because you not only
get to practice the new things you're studying,
but also review things you've already studied
in the past, which is very important of course.
So let's just do task 1.
This isn't actually about spanning tree, but
let's review some VLAN configuration.
So, verify that the current IP configurations
on PC1 and PC2 match the IP configurations
listed in the IP addresses table.
Here is the table, PC1 and PC2.
They are in the same subnet, they should have
the same default gateway.
192.168.100.1.
PC1 is .101, PC2 is .102.
Let's check.
So, to get to the CLI of these PCs, click
on them here and click console, console.
Alright, so I have PC1 and PC2.
Let's check PC1 first.
How do you check the IP address on a PC, or
a Windows PC at least?
That is ipconfig.
Okay, IP address .101 looks good, /24 mask,
and the default gateway is .1, okay.
PC1 is good.
PC2, ipconfig.
.102, /24, default gateway is .1.
Okay, so both PC1 and PC2 have the correct
configuration.
Task 2, verify the connectivity by pinging
from PC1 to PC2.
The ping should succeed.
Okay, let's try.
PING 192.168.100.102.
Okay, looks good, the ping goes through.
Okay, so step 3, configure Switch1 with the
appropriate host name.
Okay, so I'll open up the CLI of Switch1.
ENABLE.
CONF T. HOSTNAME Switch1.
There we go, the host name has changed.
Next, configure FastEthernet ports 0/1, 2,
and 3 as trunk ports and create VLAN 3.
Okay, Switch1 is here.
Okay, so all three of these are trunk ports,
or we will make them trunk ports.
And we have to manually create VLAN 3 because
we're not actually assigning any access ports
to VLAN 3.
It won't be manually, or sorry not manually,
it won't be automatically created for us.
So we have to do it ourselves.
So first let's make those trunk ports.
INTERFACE RANGE F0/1 - 3.
Now I don't know if on this switch model I
have to configure the trunk encapsulation,
dot1q or ISL.
Let's just try to set it to a trunk first.
Okay, we don't, so this switch only supports
dot1q trunk encapsulation, which is actually
common on most switches these days.
Okay, next, right, create VLAN 3.
VLAN 3.
EXIT.
And let's check that it was created.
DO SHOW VLAN BRIEF.
And it was, there is VLAN 3.
Okay, what's next?
Configure Switch2 with the appropriate host
name, create VLAN 3, add FastEthernet port
4 to VLAN 3.
And then FastEthernet ports 1 and 2, we must
configure them as trunk ports, okay.
So, FastEthernet4, VLAN 3.
So, I'm going to just assign FastEthernet4
to VLAN 3, and then VLAN3 should be automatically
created for us.
SWITCHPORT ACCESS VLAN 3.
Was it?
DO SHOW...Oh, I am on Switch1 at the moment,
that's the problem.
So, we do not need this configuration, I'll
just 'no' that, cancel that.
So let's go on to the CLI of Switch2 and let's
try that again.
CONF T. Ah right, first the host name.
HOSTNAME Switch2.
Ah, no space.
Switch2.
INTERFACE FASTETHERNET0/4.
SWITCHPORT ACCESS VLAN 3.
Was VLAN 3 created?
Yes it was.
Okay, so VLAN 3 was created and FastEthernet0/4
is now in VLAN 3.
Okay, next let's make these two interfaces
trunk ports.
INTERFACE RANGE f0/1 - 2.
SWITCHPORT MODE TRUNK, okay.
So I'm guessing the next step is Switch3.
Let's see.
Okay, configure Switch3 with the appropriate
host name, VLAN 3, add FastEthernet0/4 to VLAN
3.
And configure FastEthernet0/1 and 0/3 as trunk
ports.
And then try another ping from PC1 to PC2,
okay.
So first I will assign this interface to VLAN
3.
Let's open the CLI of Switch3.
ENABLE.
CONF T. INTERFACE F0/4.
SWITCHPORT ACCESS VLAN 3.
Let's check that it was created.
DO SHOW VLAN BRIEF.
And it was, okay.
Next, so this time it's not FastEthernet0/1
and 0/2, it's 0/1 and 0/3.
So I have to enter the INTERFACE RANGE command
a little differently.
INTERFACE RANGE f0/1 comma f0/3.
Now I'm in.
If I did like I did before, 0/1 to 0/3, that
would include FastEthernet0/2, which we don't
have to configure now.
Okay, SWITCHPORT MODE TRUNK.
Okay, so now all of these interfaces between
the routers (*switches!), they are all trunks,
these are trunk links.
The interface going to the router is a trunk
also, and both of these PCs are now in VLAN
3.
So, the ping should go through.
Let's try once again.
And it works, okay.
So that's task 1.
As we saw before, task 2 you would configure
the router and then task 3 you would observe
what's going on with spanning tree.
So, when you have completed the lab, I haven't
but we'll end the lab anyway, you can check
your work using the grading function.
So that's this button here.
Click on it and it evaluates how you did on
the lab.
So, as you can see I missed one or more commands
in the lab, that's because we didn't finish
it.
However, notice Switch1 has a checkmark, so
we did all of the configuration on Switch1
correctly.
These three interfaces are trunks, and VLAN
3 was created.
If you ever have any trouble during the lab
you can check the lab solutions down here,
gives you sample outputs, shows you all the
commands you need to do, and gives you some
detailed explanations like this.
So I really think Boson's NetSim is a great
resource when studying for your CCNA.
If you want to get a copy, please follow the
link in the video description.
I highly recommend it.
I used it for my certifications and it really
is a great tool.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.